@node About, Installation, License, Top
@chapter Authors, Contact, Bugs

@menu
* LicenseExtra::                
* Submitting a Bug Report ::    
* Requesting a New Feature::    
* Praises::                     
* Contribution::                
* Reference::                   
* Authors::                     
* Acknowledgements::            
* Contact::                     
@end menu

@node LicenseExtra, Submitting a Bug Report , About, About
@section License? What license?

@xref{License}.

@quindex I found a bug/strange feature. What should I do?

@node Submitting a Bug Report , Requesting a New Feature, LicenseExtra, About
@section Submitting a Bug Report 

If you find a bug or an undesireable feature or anything that is worth a
couple of lines ranting at the authors, please go ahead and
send a bugreport on the MOKK Lab bugzilla page at @value{MOKKWEB}
or send a mail to me (@pxref{Contact}).

@node Requesting a New Feature, Praises, Submitting a Bug Report , About
@section Requesting a New Feature

@quindex I am using ocamorph, but desparately lacking a feature X. Can I request it?

So you are using hunlex and find yourself realizing that you would need
a certain feature desparately but it happens not to be implemented. 
Go ahead and request it from the authors (@pxref{Contact}) or sit silently and hope!

@node Praises, Contribution, Requesting a New Feature, About
@section Praises

@quindex I found ocamorph cool/useful/useless. How can I let the authors know?

If you have an opinion about ocamorph and would like the authors to
hear about it. @xref{Contact}.

@node Contribution, Reference, Praises, About
@section Contribution

@quindex I am a keen hacker/stupid user with sleepless nights/long afternoons at work to be wasted/spent usefully. How can I contribute to your work?

Ocamorph is open source development, so developpers are welcome to
contribute to make it better in any imaginable way. Contact us
(@pxref{Contact}) to work out the details of how and what you would want
to contribute to Ocamorph.

@node Reference, Authors, Contribution, About
@section Reference 

@quindex I used ocamorph and report it in a paper. What reference do I use?

For the context of the whole huntools kit, use

@verbatim
@InProceedings{tron:etal:05,
  author =       {Viktor Tr\'on and Gy\''orgy Gyepesi and P\'eter Hal\'acsy and Andr\'as Kornai and L\'aszl\'o N\'emeth and D\'aniel Varga},
  title =        {Hunmorph: open source word analysis},
  booktitle =    {Proceedings of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Software},
  year =         2005
}
@end verbatim

These and other papers can be downloaded from the MOKK Lab publications page at 
@value{MOKKWEB}

@node Authors, Acknowledgements, Reference, About
@section Authors

@quindex Who are you? 

The author of ocamorph and this document is @i{Viktor Trón}. He can be mailed to on @*
@value{MYEMAIL}
@*
Hopefully more can be found on MOKK Lab's pages at @value{MOKKWEB}.

Viktor Trón and Péter Halácsy wrote the C binding for ocamorph.

Péter Halácsy is the author of the MacOS package of the ocamorph
executable.

Attila Balogh made the MS Windows executable.

@node Acknowledgements, Contact, Authors, About
@section Acknowledgements

Thanks to Péter Halácsy, Dániel Varga and András Kornai who contributed various
ideas and design suggestions during the development of ocamorph.

Thanks to Chrisoph Filliatre, whose ocaml modules implementing
bitvectors and tries are the basis for the respective ocamorph components.

Special thanks to Dániel Varga and Péter Halácsy for extensive testing
 of ocamorh. 

@node Contact,  , Acknowledgements, About
@section Contact

@quindex How can I contact you?

We can get in contact if you
@enumerate
@item 
Mail to @i{Viktor Trón} on @*
@value{MYEMAIL}

@item
Join the forums on @value{MOKKWEB}

@item
Submit a bug report (@pxref{Submitting a Bug Report}) or feature request (@pxref{Requesting a New Feature}).

@end enumerate




@c Local Variables: 
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: "ocamorph.texinfo"
@c End: 
