@node Installation, Bootstrapping, About, Top
@chapter Installation 

@quindex How to install ocamorph?

So you want to install ocamorph (@pxref{Introduction}) from
the source distribution.  This document describes what and how
you can install with this distribution.

@quindex What is ocamorph?

@menu
* Download::                    
* Supported Platforms::         
* Prerequisites::               
* Install::                     
* Installation in more detail::  
* Uninstall and Reinstall::     
* Installed Files and Directories::  
* Documentation ::              
@end menu

@node Download, Supported Platforms, Installation, Installation
@section Download

@quindex Where can I find the sources?

The latest version of the ocamorph source distribution is always available
from the MOKK LAB website at @value{OCAMORPHWEB} or, if all else fails, by
mailing to Viktor Trón @value{MYEMAIL}.

@node Supported Platforms, Prerequisites, Download, Installation
@section Supported Platforms

@quindex What platforms are supported by ocamorph?

Ocamorph can be compiled on any platform for which there
is an @code{ocaml} compiler (@pxref{Prerequisites}). This includes
all Linuxes, unices, MacOSX, MS Windows. There are binary packages for 
these platforms on the MOKK LAB website at @value{OCAMORPHWEB}.

@node Prerequisites, Install, Supported Platforms, Installation
@section Prerequisites

@quindex What do I need if I want to install ocamorph from source?
If you install ocamorph from the source package you need to have 
some other software installed on your system.

@deffn Prerequisite {ocaml}
@cindex ocaml

Ocamorph is written in the @dfn{ocaml} programming language
@uref{http://www.ocaml.org/}.  OCaml compilers are available for
virtually all platforms in various 
package formats for free from @uref{http://caml.inria.fr/ocaml/distrib.html}.

@quindex What version of ocaml do I need to compile ocamorph?

You will need @command{ocaml} version >=3.08.2 to compile ocamorph.
@end deffn

@deffn Prerequisite {make} 
@cindex make
@cindex OCamlMakefile

Installation is based on @file{OCamlMakefile} (i.e., @code{ocaml-make}) 
courtesy of Markus Mottl @*
@uref{http://www.ai.univie.ac.at/~markus/home/ocaml_sources.html#OCamlMakefile}
@*

@cindex make, GNU

@file{OCamlMakefile} presupposes @samp{GNU make} >= 3.80 but ocamorph
installation works with earlier versions of GNU make as well. 
The installation tries to determine the make version automatically and
uses a workaround Makefile in case you use make <3.80. 
In case this fails, set the @samp{Makefile} variable @code{OCAMLMAKEFILE} to 
either @file{OCamlMakefile} (for make >=3.80) or
@file{make_pre3.80.OCamlMakefile} (for make <3.80).

@end deffn

@deffn Prerequisite {C library}
@cindex C library
@quindex What are the prerequisites for the C library version of ocamorph?

If you want to compile and install the C library for ocamorph, you need
@samp{ar} and @code{ranlib}.

@end deffn

@deffn Prerequisite {Documentation}
@cindex documentation
@quindex What are the prerequisites for compiling the documentation of ocamorph?

If you want to compile the documentation for ocamorph, you need 
the GNU @code{texinfo} software documentation system installed.
@uref{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/texinfo/}
@end deffn

@node Install, Installation in more detail, Prerequisites, Installation
@section Install

@quindex How to install ocamorph?
@cindex make, ocamorph installation
@cindex Makefile, ocamorph installation

ocamorph is installed in the good old way by typing 

@example
$ make && sudo make install
@end example 

in the toplevel directory of the unpacked distribution.
If this works, great! Go ahead to @ref{Bootstrapping}.

@node Installation in more detail, Uninstall and Reinstall, Install, Installation
@section Advanced Install

The ocamorph distribution is available in a source tarball called @file{ocamorph.tgz}.
First you have to unpack it by typing  

@example
$ tar xzvf ocamorph.tgz
@end example

Then, you enter the toplevel directory of the unpacked distribution with
@example
$ cd ocamorph
@end example

To compile the tools and libraries and documentation, simply type

@example
$ make
@end example 

in the toplevel directory of the distribution.

To install it (on what gets installed, @pxref{Installed Files and Directories}), type

@example
$ make install
@end example

Well, by default this would want to install things under @file{/usr/local}, so
you have to have admin permissions. If you are not root but you are in the
sudoers file with the appropriate rights, you type:

@example 
$ sudo make install
@end example

@quindex How can I change the installation target directories?

You can change the location of the installation by changing the install prefix path with 

@example
$ sudo make @env{INSTALLPREFIX}=@file{/my/favourite/path} install
@end example

Changing the location of installation for individual install targets
individually is not recommended but easy-peasy if you have a clue about
@samp{make} and @file{Makefile}-s. To do this you have to change the relevant
@file{Makefile}-s in the subdirectories of the distribution.
@xref{Installed Files and Directories}.

If you have problems, doubleckeck that you have the prerequisites
(@pxref{Prerequisites}). If you think you followed the instructions
but still have problems, submit a bug report (@pxref{Submitting a Bug Report}).

If you are upgrading an earlier version of ocamorph, you may want to
@i{uninstall} the earlier one first (@pxref{Uninstall and Reinstall}).

If you do not want to compile and install the ocamorph C library, then 
use 

@example
$ make CLIB= 
$ make CLIB= install
@end example

you can also compile any of the ocaml subprojects separately by setting the
@env{SUBPROJS} variable:

@example
$ make SUBPROJS="ocamorphlib" CLIB=
@end example

The subprojects are called: @samp{ocamorph_debug ocamorphlib ocamorph_noassert}
If you compile subprojects individually than you have to cleanup after
the projects, cause intermediate targets are incompatible.

@example
$ make SUBPROJS="ocamorphlib" cleanup
@end example


@node Uninstall and Reinstall, Installed Files and Directories, Installation in more detail, Installation
@section Uninstall and Reinstall

@quindex How do I uninstall ocamorph?
@quindex How do I upgrade ocamorph?
@quindex How do I reinstall ocamorph?

The install prefix is remembered in the source distribution in the file
@file{install_prefix}. So after you @code{cd} into the toplevel
directory of the distribution, you can uninstall ocamorph by typing

@fiindex install_prefix

@example
$ make uninstall
@end example

You can reinstall ocamorph with

@example
$ make reinstall 
@end example

at any time if you make modifications to the code or compile options.

After installation you can delete the whole source and build tree,
however, in this case the install location will not be remembered so
uninstall and reinstall are not available.

@c ref to changing keywords, maybe

@quotation
@strong{Warning:}
Note that if you fiddle with changing the location of individual install targets, uninstall
and resinstall will not work correctly.
@end quotation


@node Installed Files and Directories, Documentation  , Uninstall and Reinstall, Installation
@section Installed Files and Directories

@quindex What files and directories are installed when I install ocamorph?

The following files and directories are installed, paths are relative to
the @i{install prefix} (@pxref{Install}):

@itemize

@item
@file{bin/ocamorph_debug}
@fiindex ocamorph_debug

is the executable which can be run on the command line (@pxref{Command-line
Control}) and can be used for debugging.

@item
@file{bin/ocamorph_debug}
@fiindex ocamorph_noassert

is the executable which can be run on the command line (@pxref{Command-line
Control}) and cannot be used for debugging. Otherwise it has the same
functionality as @file{ocamorph_debug}.

@item
@file{bin/ocamorph}
@fiindex ocamorph

the symbolic link to @file{ocamorph_noassert} and can be run on the command line (@pxref{Command-line
Control}).

@item
@file{lib/ocamorph} 
@fiindex ocamorph (library directory, @file{lib/ocamorph})
@cpindex ocamorph, library

is the directrory in which the ocamorph library components are
installed.

@item
@file{lib/ocamorph/ocamorph.cmxa} 
@fiindex ocamorph.cmxa
@cpindex ocamorph, ocaml native code library

is the ocamorph ocaml native code library.


@item
@file{lib/ocamorph/ocamorph.cmi} 
@fiindex ocamorph.cmi
@cpindex ocamorph, ocaml native code include

is the ocamorph ocaml native code library.


@item
@file{lib/ocamorph/libocamorph.a} 
@fiindex libocamorph.a
@cpindex ocamorph, static C library

is the ocamorph static C library. See @c @ref{C library}.

@item
@file{lib/ocamorph/ocamorph.h} 
@fiindex ocamorph.h
@cpindex ocamorph, C header

is the C header file for ocamorph C library.

@item
@file{share/doc/ocamorph/}
@cpindex documentation 
@fiindex ocamorph (documentation directory, @file{share/doc/ocamorph})

is a directory containing the ocamorph documentation. 
Subdirectories indicate the various document formats (see @ref{Documentation})
most probably including a replica of this document.

@item
@file{ocamorph.1}
@cpindex manual, man page
@fiindex ocamorph.1

is the ocamorph man page, that describes the command-line use of ocamorph (see
@pxref{Command-line Control}). 

@end itemize

@node Documentation ,  , Installed Files and Directories, Installation
@section Documentation 

Ocamorph documentation is available in various formats. 
You can compile and install them from the source distribution by
changing to the doc directory and typing @code{make}.

Available formats are

@itemize
@item info 
texinfo pages
@item plaintext 
@item html 
big bundle of html
@item bightml
one big file
@item dvi 
@item ps 
@item pdf 
compiling a pdf is done with @code{texi2pdf} (which is a prerequisite
for pdf generation)
@end itemize

@c Local Variables: 
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: "ocamorph.texinfo"
@c End: 
